one of the strange sort of tissues of
morality in the 21st century is the game
we play with white Western moneyed
countries quote-unquote rescuing
dissidents from dictatorships someone
stands up and dares to criticize the
government of China and they're thrown
in prison say the American Embassy the
French Embassy perhaps even the Canadian
Embassy stands up and demand that this
person be released and if released the
white Western nation promises they'll
take you in this critic of the
dictatorship as a refugee in their own
country and in this way sources of
instability are recruited into the ranks
of the underpaid underemployed new
immigrants in Western countries and they
ceased to be a source of criticism they
cease to be a force for dynamic change
in their countries of origin
I know people pat themselves on the back
for this they feel there's a sort of
heroism in rescuing Wei Jingsheng for
example from China any of the dissonance
in China any of the distance from South
Africa when I was a kid that was always
the big story would be people in this
sense rescued from South Africa and
Chile dictatorships now largely
forgotten forgotten for having repressed
people who complained against them
protest against them and so on
the world would be in a profound and
subtle way a very different place if the
attitudes of those Western democracies
was no the future of China is yours and
not ours to decide and if you want
democracy in China you shouldn't become
a refugee living in Montreal you should
stay in China organize antagonize
speak your truth to power fight and it's
tragic it's tragic to see what happens
it's tragic to see that someone like Wei
Jingsheng spent so much of his adult
life in prison so many of the people
have criticized China every despotism
around the world even Saudi Arabia now
end up in prison or end up disappearing
but aren't we simply helping those
critics of authoritarian governments to
disappear in a very different sense
aren't we just doing the dictators dirty
work for them by absconding with these
people and silencing them in a different
sense by taking them away to a place
like Montreal where they could no longer
possibly be part of the political
struggle in the country of origin
there's a strange sort of moral
pageantry to what the United Nations now
is and does in the year 2019 the United
Nations has an almost infinite budget
compared to a tiny poverty-stricken
powerless country like Laos in Southeast
Asia the budget per annum for the United
Nations is about fifty billion dollars a
small intervention a small project from
United Nations will spend something like
three hundred thousand US dollars per
year the amount paid even to United
Nations volunteers in salary is
infinitely high compared to you know
local allow people struggling to make a
living so when I was there a nurse at a
hospital would make maybe fifteen US
dollars per month a nurse who had really
been to university was highly educated I
knew of some who made forty five US
dollars per month but they were
receiving fifteen dollars from the Lao
government and the other thirty
government pardon me the other thirty
dollars is coming from international
donors it was precisely coming from
agencies like the United Nations
maybe not the UN maybe European or other
other donors were increasing their
salaries there were definitely medical
doctors earning $30 a month and so on
and you have the lowest level volunteer
for the United Nations would be earning
maybe three thousand US dollars per
month
of course full-time staff much much more
than that
they were as the title of the book says
the Lords of poverty why were they there
they were there supposedly
in pursuit of the highest ideals set
down by third-rate philosopher Immanuel
Kant and fourth rate president United
States FDR Franklin Delano Roosevelt
doctor to the Four Freedoms and so on
all those pious resolutions that were
made at the end of World War two the
United Nations are supposed to embody
and push for that
kind of progress and what what do they
actually do here's Philip halston
set to visit Laos to examine poverty and
human rights issues this is supposedly
the advocate for positive social change
this is supposedly the man is going to
come and speak truth to power this is
supposedly an advocate for democracy
human rights freedom of expression all
the things that in a tiny communist
dictatorship like Laos people lack along
with access to education clean drinking
water the things that people in Western
countries tend to take for granted
un expert says Lao government policies
make life worse for poor comma
marginalized wow that photograph really
tells you all you need to know about
this total outsider arriving in a
village in Laos with no knowledge of the
language no knowledge of the history no
own knowledge of how even the current
bureaucracy and government works
just a total ignoramus with an infinite
budget showing up making his tour of the
countryside in 11 days the Lao
government's economic policies have
worsened the living conditions of the
nation's poor and marginalized
populations while widening the gap
between the haves and have-nots a United
Nations rights expert said Thursday at
the end of an 11 day official visit to
the country in a statement issued at the
end of his March 18th to 28th where is
it visit Philip halston the UN Special
Rapporteur on extreme poverty and Human
Rights said that improvements in the
lives of the poorest lotions had not
kept pace with the country's economic
development despite important progress
in reducing poverty to Lao government's
economic growth strategies have too
often destroyed livelihoods and trenched
vulnerability and actually made some
poor people poorer by taking away their
access to land livelihoods and resources
mm-hmm
here are some quotations from an
interview he gave at the end of his
in-depth 11 day trip to Laos quote I
spent 10 or 11 days in Laos and I was
looking mainly at the situation of
people who live in poverty but the
reality is that in Laos the model of
economic development that's been
followed has made the wealthy very rich
and created an also wealthy middle-class
but the rest of society has not
benefited so they've had huge and record
economic growth but they've also put
almost no serious resources into health
education Social Protection and so
people are not getting access to good
schools they have very low levels of
health care the education standards are
bad and the government has just not
invested in the human capital which it
needs to do now let me ask you if you
were the government of Laos would you
respect this man's opinion if you were
the common people of Laos would you
respect this Minister if you were even a
journalist just covering events and Lao
si devoted years of your life to
learning the language history and
politics why would you have any respect
for this man's analysis based on ten or
eleven days of work he doesn't know the
language he doesn't know the history he
really doesn't know anything he's a man
with a ruler who's shown up to take the
measure of the nation but let's carry on
for a moment here what are his
recommendations is he calling for
democracy is he calling for revolution
is he calling for some fundamental
changes it's lives of the poor is he
calling for some fundamental changes so
that Laos lives up to those ideals that
the United Nations was set up to protect
per pound and enshrine question what
specific obstacles must the government
face in order to improve the lives of
average low citizens oh here comes the
answer I think the challenge is for the
government to adopt a policy which is
less centralized they need to permit a
much greater
of openness within civil society they
need to move towards more transparency
and government people need to be able to
know what sort of contracts have been
signed with foreign investors you know
you don't think they need to be able to
vote for more than one political party
elect who's in charge you don't think
they need to be able to recall members
of government and put them in prison
when they've been found to be corrupt or
taking bribes you don't think they need
to have that's no Vic you think the poor
in Laos need to be able to examine
contracts that have been signed with for
investors are you sure you're not
representing say a neoliberal foreign
investors interest rather than the
interests of the poorest of the poor gee
how did you get how did you get your
priorities so mixed up here it sounded
like just a minute ago you were saying
the problem is that they have very poor
education very poor health care so on
and so forth how do you think they're
gonna change that how do you think
you're going to have a government that's
by the poor and for the poor but I think
more transparency in the signing of
contracts with foreign investors there
needs to be a way for those who are
being resettled to make complaints which
will be taken seriously and not met with
brutal repression oh so your point is
the people are gonna be resettled anyway
but their complaints should be taken
seriously what about what about a
democracy where you don't live in a
military dictatorship that just
resettles you whenever it's in the
government's convenience to build
another goldmine both another highway so
on and so I don't know I just sounds to
me like you're not really dealing with
the fundamental issues here after your
10 or 11 days in the country um
quote I actually don't think that those
changes would require too much of the
present government it has done some very
positive things it has started to crack
down on corruption they say that every
year
it has consulted on some issues but it
hasn't yet gone your
far enough to really make sure that the
people are aware of what's going on and
that it's receiving the necessary
information about the actual situation
in the country look guys the problem
with the United Nations is not just the
evil that it does it's not just its
direct involvement in you know some of
the worst atrocities in the history of
the world after World War Two and it's
not just wrapping those atrocities in
the in the flag of the United Nations
there's a real question of opportunity
cost here there's a real question of
what might have been I think it's very
sad that the main source of discontent
in these countries is being in a sense
recruited into silence but being taken
away year after year
generation after generation as refugees
the people who could be the conscience
of the nation the people who could be
the canary and the coal mine and the
people who could be crying for political
change organizing for instigating
political change are ending up in the
suburbs of Paris and Montreal and some
of them in New York and some of them in
Long Beach California big Lotion
community in Long Beach and then on the
other hand the people whose job really
is to advocate for country like Laos to
meet the minimum standards of human
rights and democracy are instead the
most corrupt people in the world they're
the United Nations they are the Lords of
poverty
[Music]